The evolution of the culture industry is associated with the evolution of capitalism. “The Culture Industry” as a concept was coined by two Critical Theorists, Max Hokheimer and Theodore W. Adorno. Capitalism as a mode of production succeeded feudalism and for the first time, a form of political economic structure was developed that produced for the sake of production and profit. Although writers and thinkers like Robinson explained how capitalism’s “over production” and “underconsumption” leads to its intrusion in new economic territory to control it, Adorno and Hokheimer explained how the culture industry exists to control the minds of the people. 
Music, art, dance and literature is something that even the first Homo Sapiens indulged into (maybe not literature); however, never has “culture” been industrialised and produced to satisfy the so-called needs of the consumers. As the authors have suggested: “Films and Radios no longer need to present themselves as art. The truth that they are nothing but business is used as an ideology to legitimize the trash they intentionally produce”. This situation, the writers say, is created due to the establishment of monopoly capital that produces content (including everything) in order to please the consumer). This content is standardised and more or less the same that masses are exposed to; this standardization is a product of the “need” of the consumer which is why al this it met with “less resistance”. 

“The commercial character of culture causes the difference between culture and practical life to disappear”. This is a strong statement by the authors. It basically means that culture industry shows the “same” aspect of society again and again which makes us believe it is real, but in ‘actuality’ is far from reality. How many times have we watched movies set in high schools where an underconfident boy tries impress the most beautiful girl in the school, but fails to do so because the bully in the school doesn’t let him? However, at the end of the day, he is able to impress her and the movie ends! This happened in Spider Man, Never Back Down and almost all movies set in high school of college. The same pattern is followed in Japanese cartoons like Perman, Doremon and Ninja Hathori. Children are exposed to this cultural pattern ever since they’re five or maybe six years old. But how many times does this really happen? The writers add how “on all sides the borderline between culture and empirical reality becomes more and more indistinct”; this is something that isolates human beings from themselves. 

Adorno and Hokheimer go on to discuss how people get stuck in this cycle of disillusionment. They discuss that capitalism leads to compartmentalisation of work which chalks out a time frame in a day called “leisure time”. Leisure time is supposed to be a time when a human being works on him/her/themselves and work on artistic or intellectual development; become productive. This, however, doesn’t happen. Instead, people get indulged into mass culture which in reality distract person from reality. People in, for instance Latvia may love watching movies based on Alien invasion, perhaps ‘District 9’ and fear what would happen if this really happens? While fantasising this, they may forget, consciously or unconsciously ignore how Russia’s militarisation along their border and installation of weapon systems in Kaliningrad ‘actually’ is the ‘real’ threat. The probability of Russia invading Latvia is more than the probability of the aliens invading the planet Earth. This is the ‘unreal’ world that the culture industry forces us to live in. 

The evolution of the culture industry is the devolution of the essence of culture. Cultural content today is created not for the love and respect for art, but for money. How are almost all the love stories written by recent fiction writers more or less the same? It is because the industry has legitimised this culture which eventually helps the publishing companies earn. Music in Bollywood the same. All they use is simple, uniform tune on a guitar, some electronic music and the singer repeating certain key words that is a part of the so-called “lingo” of the millennials. This is the reason why now people define time periods and music in terms of “trend”. Some years ago, the trend was listening to songs from the movies, now the trend dictates the growth of independent so-called “artists” who sing all of their songs in the “same” manner since that is how they can capitalise it. The culture industry, indeed as Adorno and Hokheimer say uses capitalism’s instrumental rationality for profit. 
